
CHAPTER XI
Guenever sat in the Queen's chamber at Carlisle Castle. The huge bed had been re-made as a settee. It looked tidy and rectangular under its canopy, so that you were shy of sitting down. There was a fireplace with a little pot warming beside it, a high chair, and the reading desk. Also there was a book to read, perhaps the Galeotto one which Dante mentions. It had cost the same price as ninety oxen, but, as Guenever had already read it seven times, it was no longer exciting. A late fall of snow threw the evening light upward into the chamber, shining on the ceiling more than on the floor, so as to alter the usual shadows. They were blue, and in the wrong places. The great lady was sewing, sitting rather formally in the high chair with the book beside her, and one of her waiting women, sitting on the steps of the bed, was sewing too.
Guenever stitched away with the half-blank mind of a needle-woman, the other half of her brain moving idly among her troubles. She wished she was not at Carlisle. It was too near the north-which was Mordred's country-too far away from the securities of civilization. For instance, she would have liked to be at London-in the Tower, perhaps. She would have liked, instead of this dreary expanse of snow, to be looking out from the Tower windows at the fun and bustle of the metropolis: at London Bridge, with the staggering houses all over it, which were constantly tumbling off into the river. She remembered it as a bridge of great personality, what with the houses and the heads of rebels on spikes and the place where Sir David had fought a full-dress joust with the Lord Welles. The cellars of the houses were in the piers of the bridge, and it had a chapel of its own, and a tower to defend it. It was a perfect toy-town of a place, with housewives popping their heads out of windows, or letting down buckets into the river on long ropes, or throwing out slops, or hanging the washing, or screaming to their children when the drawbridge was going to be pulled up.
For that matter, it would have been nice merely to be in the Tower itself. Here, in Carlisle, everything was as still as death. But there, in the Conqueror's tower, a constant ebb and flow of cockneys would be livening the frost. Even Arthur's menagerie, which he now kept in the Tower, would be giving a comfortable background of noise and smell. The latest addition was a full-sized elephant, presented by the King of France, and specially drawn for the record by the indefatigable news-hawk, Matthew Paris.
When Guenever got to the elephant, she put down the sewing and began to rub her fingers. They were numb. They did not thaw so quickly as they used to.
"Have you put the crumbs out for the birds, Agnes?"
"Yes, madam. The robin was perky today. He sang quite a trill against one of the blackbirds who was greedy."
"Poor creatures. Still, I suppose they will all be singing in a few weeks."
"It seems a long time since everybody went away," said Agnes. "The court is like the birds now, it is so silent and heartless."
"They will come back, no doubt."
"Yes, madam."
The queen took up her needle again, and pushed it carefully through.
"They say Sir Lancelot has been brave."
"Sir Lancelot always was a brave gentleman, madam."
"In the last letter it says that Gawaine had a duel with him. He must have been miserable, to fight him."
Agnes said emphatically: "I can't think why the King will go with that there Sir Gawaine against his best friend. Anybody can see that it is only out of blind temper. And then to lay waste the land of France, just to spite Sir Lancelot, and to do these terrible killings, and to say such things as them Thrashers do. It won't do nobody no good, to carry on like that. Why can't they let bygones be bygones, is what I ask?"
"I think the King goes with Sir Gawaine because he is trying to be just. He thinks that the Orkneys have a right to demand justice for Gareth's death-and I suppose they have. Besides, if the King didn't cling to Sir Gawaine he would have nobody left. He was prouder of the Round Table than of anything, and now it is splitting up and he wants to keep somebody."
"It is a poor way to keep the Table together," said Agnes, "by fighting Sir Lancelot."
"Sir Gawaine has a right to justice. At least, they say he has. And the King's choice is not free either. He is swept along by the people-by men who want conquest in France and have made a claim to it, or who are sick of the long peace he has managed to keep, or who are anxious for military promotion and a killing in return for those who died in the Market Square. There are the young knights of Mordred's party, who believe in nationalism, and who have been taught to think that my husband is an old fogey, and there are the relatives of the ones who were in the fight on the stairs, and there is the clan Orkney, with their ancient hatreds on their minds. War is like a fire, Agnes. One man may start it, but it will spread all over. It is not about any one thing in particular."
"Ah, these high and mighty matters, madam-they are beyond us poor women. But come now, what did it say in the letter?"
Guenever sat for some time, looking at the letter without seeing it, while her mind revolved the problems of her husband. Then she said slowly: "The King likes Lancelot so much that he is forced to be unfair to him-for fear of being unfair to other people."
"Yes, ma'am."
"It says," said the Queen, noticing the letter she was looking at with a start, "it says that Sir Gawaine rode in front of the castle every day, and called out that Lancelot was a coward and a traitor. Lancelot's knights were angry, and went out to him one by one, but he charged them all down, and hurt some of them badly. He nearly killed Bors and Lionel, until at last Sir Lancelot had to go himself. The people inside the castle made him. He told Sir Gawaine that he was driven to it, like a beast at bay."
"And what did Sir Gawaine say?"
"Sir Gawaine said: 'Leave thy babbling and come off, and let us ease our hearts.' "
"And did they?"
"Yes, they had a duel in front of the castle. Everybody promised not to interfere, and they began at nine o'clock in the morning. You know how Sir Gawaine can always fight better in the mornings. That was why they began so early."
"Mercy on Sir Lancelot, to have him as strong as three! For I did hear tell that the Old Ones have the fairy blood in them, through the red hair, you know, madam, and this makes the laird as strong as three people before noon, because the sun fights for him!"
"It must have been terrible, Agnes. But Sir Lancelot was too proud not to give the advantage."
"I wonder he was not killed."
"He nearly was. But he covered himself with his shield and parried slowly all the time and gave ground. It says he received many sad brunts, but he managed to defend himself until midday. Then, of course, when the fairy strength had gone down, he was able to take the offensive, and he ended by giving Gawaine a blow on the head which knocked him over. He could not get up."
"Alas, Sir Gawaine!"
"Yes, he could have killed him there and then."
"But he didn't."
"No. Sir Lancelot stood back and leaned on his sword. Gawaine begged him to kill him. He was more furious than ever and called out: 'Why do you stop? Come on then: kill me and finish your butchering. I will not yield. Kill me at once, for I shall only fight you again if you spare my life.' He was crying."
"We may depend upon it," said Agnes wisely, "that Sir Lancelot refused to strike a felled knight."
"We may depend."
"He was always a kind, good gentleman, though not what you may call a beauty."
"He was the chief of all."
They fell silent, shy of their feelings, and began to stitch. Presently the Queen said: "The light gets bad, Agnes. Do you think we could have the rushes?"
"Certainly, madam. I was thinking the same myself."
She began lighting them at the fire, grumbling about the backward place and the naked, northern savages to have no candles, while Guenever hummed absently. It was the duet which she used to sing with Lancelot, and, when she recognized it, she stopped abruptly.
"There, madam. The days seem to draw out."
"Yes: we shall have the spring soon."
Sitting down and stitching away in the smoky light, Agnes resumed her catechism where it had broken off.
"And what did the King say about the business?"
"He cried when he saw how Gawaine was spared. It made him remember things, and he became so wretched that he was ill."
"Would that be what they call a nervous shakedown, madam?"
"Yes, Agnes. He fell sick for sorrow, and Gawaine had concussion, so they were bad together. But the knights are keeping up the siege."
"Well, it isn't a very cheerful letter, is it, madam?"
"No, it isn't."
"I remember having a letter once-but there, they say bad news travels the fastest."
"Everything is letters now-now that the court is empty, and the world split, and nobody left but the Lord Protector."
"Ah, that there Sir Mordred: I never could abide the likes of him. What does he want to go a-speechifying at the people for, and taking off his hat to make them cheer? Why can't he dress more cheerful like, instead of hanging about in that black, as if he were Holy Doomsday? He caught it from poor Sir Gawaine, I dare say."
"The uniform is supposed to be in mourning for Gareth."
"He never cared for Sir Gareth, that one didn't. I don't believe he cares for anybody."
"He cared for his mother, Agnes."
"Aye, and she had her throat slit for being no better than she should be. They are a queer pack, the lot of them."
"Queen Morgause," said Guenever thoughtfully, "must have been a strange person. It is common knowledge, now that Mordred is made the Lord Protector, so it doesn't matter talking about it. But she must have been a powerful woman to have caught our King when she had four big boys of her own. Why, she caught Sir Lamorak when she was a grandmother. She must have had a terrible effect on her sons, if one of them could have felt so fiercely about her that he killed her. She was nearly seventy. I expect she ate Mordred, Agnes, like a spider."
"They did used to talk at one time, about the Cornwall sisters being witches. Of course, the worst of them was Morgan le Fay. But that there Morgause ran her close."
"It makes one sorry for Mordred."
"You keep your pity for yourself, my lady, for you will get none from him."
"He has been polite since he was left in charge."
"Aye, that he has. It is the quiet ones that do the mischief."
Guenever considered this, holding her material to the light. She asked with some anxiety: "You don't think that Sir Mordred means to do wrong, do you, Agnes?"
"He is a dark one."
"He wouldn't do anything wrong when the King has left him to look after the country, and to look after us?"
"That King of yours, madam, if you will excuse the liberty, is quite beyond my comprehension. First he goes to fight with his best friend because Sir Gawaine tells him to, and then he leaves his bitterest enemy to be the Lord Protector. Why does he choose to act so blind?"
"Mordred has never broken the laws."
"That is because he is too cunning."
"The King said that Mordred would have to be the heir to the throne, and you could not take the King and the heir out of the country at the same time, so naturally he had to be left as the Protector. It was only fair."
"That fairness, madam, it will never come to no good."
They sewed away.
Agnes added: "The King should have stayed, if that is true, and let Sir Mordred go."
"I wish he had."
Later she explained: "I think the King wants to be with Sir Gawaine, in case he can moderate between them."
They stitched uneasily, the needles fusing through the dark material with a long gleam like falling stars.
"Are you frightened of Sir Mordred, Agnes?"
"Yes, madam, that I am."
"So am I. He walks about so softly lately, and ... looks at people in a queer way. And then there are all these speeches about Gaels and Saxons and Jews, and all the shouting and hysterics. I heard him laughing last week, by himself. It was horrible."
"He is a sly one. Maybe he is listening now."
"Agnes!"
Guenever dropped her needle as if she had been struck.
"Oh, come now, madam: you must not take on. I was only having my joke."
But the Queen remained frozen.
"Go to the door. I believe you are right."
"Oh, madam, I couldn't do that."
"Open it at once, Agnes."
"Madam, but suppose he is there!"
She had caught the feeling. The hopeless rushlights were not enough. He might have been in the room itself, in a dark corner. She rose in a flutter, like a partridge while the hawk is over, and plucked at her skirt. For both women the castle was suddenly too dark, too empty, too lonely, too northerly, too full of night and winter.
"If you open it, he will go away."
"But we must give him time to go away."
They strove with their voices, feeling themselves to be under a black wing.
"Stand near it and speak loudly then, before you open."
"Madam, what shall I say?"
"Say, 'Shall I open the door?' Then I will say, 'Yes, I think it is time to go to bed.' "
"I think it is time to go to bed."
"Go on."
"Very good, madam. Shall I begin?"
"Begin, yes, quickly."
"I don't know as I can do it."
"Oh, Agnes, please be quick!"
"Very well, madam. I think I can do it now."
Facing the door as if it might attack her, Agnes addressed it at the top of her voice.
"I am going to open the door!"
"It is time to go to bed!"
Nothing happened.
"Now open it," said the Queen.
She lifted the latch and threw it open, and there was Mordred smiling in the frame.
"Good evening, Agnes."
"Oh, sir!"
The wretched woman dropped him a fluttering curtsey, with one hand clutching at her breast, and scuttled past him for the stairs. He stood aside politely. When she was gone he stepped into the room, sumptuous in his black velvet, with one cold diamond beaming in the rushlight from his scarlet badge. Anybody who had not seen him for a month or two would have known at once that he was mad-but his brains had gone so gradually that those who lived with him had failed to see it. He was followed by his small black pug-dog, flirting its bright eyes and curly tail.
"Our Agnes seems to be in a nervous state," he said. "Good evening, Guenever."
"Good evening, Mordred."
"A little fine embroidery? I thought you would be knitting socks for soldiers."
"Why have you come?"
"Just an evening call. You must forgive the drama."
"Do you always wait outside doors?"
"One has to come through a door somehow, madam. It is more convenient than coming through the window-though, I believe, some people have been known to do that."
"I see. Will you sit down?"
He took his seat with an elaborate gesture, the pug jumping into his lap. In a way it was tragic to watch him, for he was doing what his mother did. He was acting, and had ceased to be real.
People write tragedies in which fatal blondes betray their paramours to ruin, in which Cressidas, Cleopatras, Delilahs, and sometimes even naughty daughters like Jessica bring their lovers or their parents to distress: but these are not the heart of tragedy. They are fripperies to the soul of man. What does it matter if Antony did fall upon his sword? It only killed him. It is the mother's not the lover's lust that rots the mind. It is that which condemns the tragic character to his walking death. It is Jocasta, not Juliet, who dwells in the inner chamber. It is Gertrude, not the silly Ophelia, who sends Hamlet to his madness. The heart of tragedy does not lie in stealing or taking away. Any feather-pated girl can steal a heart. It lies in giving, in putting on, in adding, in smothering without the pillows. Desdemona robbed of life or honour is nothing to a Mordred, robbed of himself-his soul stolen, overlaid, wizened, while the mother-character lives in triumph, superfluously and with stifling love endowed on him, seemingly innocent of ill-intention. Mordred was the only son of Orkney who never married. He, while his brothers fled to England, was the one who stayed alone with her for twenty years-her living larder. Now that she was dead, he had become her grave. She existed in him like the vampire. When he moved, when he blew his nose, he did it with her movement. When he acted he became as unreal as she had been, pretending to be a virgin for the unicorn. He dabbled in the same cruel magic. He had even begun to keep lap dogs like her-although he had always hated hers with the same bitter jealousy as that with which he had hated her lovers.
"Do I feel a coldness in the air this evening?"
"It is bound to be cold in February."
"I was referring to the delicacy of our personal relationship."
"The Protector, whom my husband appointed, is bound to be welcome to the Queen."
"But not the husband's bastard, I suppose?"
She lowered her needle and looked him in the face.
"I don't understand your coming like this, and I don't know what you want."
She had no wish to be hostile, but he was forcing her. She had never been afraid of anyone.
"I was thinking of a chat about the political situation-just a little chat."
She knew that they had reached a crisis of some sort, and it made her weak. She was too old now to deal with madmen, although she still had no suspicion of his sanity. Only the cumbrous irony of his tone made her feel unreal herself-made her unable to put her own words simply. But she would not give in.
"I shall be glad to hear what you want to say."
"That is extremely generous of you ... Jenny."
It was monstrous. He was making her into one of his fantasies, not speaking to a real person at all.
She said indignantly: "Will you be so kind as to address me by my title, Mordred?"
"But certainly. I must apologize if I have been trespassing on Lancelot's preserves."
The sneer acted like a tonic. It raised her stature to the royal lady which she was, to a straight-backed dowager whose rheumatic fingers flashed with rings, who had ridden the world successfully for fifty years.
"I believe," she said at once, "you would find some difficulty in doing that."
"Well! However, I am afraid I asked for it. You were always a bit of a spitfire ... Queen Jenny."
"Sir Mordred, if you can't behave like a gentleman, I shall go."
"And where will you go?"
"I should go anywhere: anywhere where a woman old enough to be your mother would be safe from this extravagance."
"The question is," he observed reflectively, "where you would be safe? The plan seems bound to founder in the last resource, when you consider that everybody has gone away to France, and that I am the ruler of the kingdom. Of course, you could go to France ... if you could get there."
She understood, or began to understand.
"I don't know what you mean."
"Then you must think it out."
"If you will excuse me," she said, rising, "I will call my woman."
"Call her by all means. Though I should have to send her away."
"Agnes will take her orders from me."
"I doubt it. Let us try."
"Mordred, will you leave me?"
"No, Jenny," he said. "I want to stay. But, if you will sit down quietly for a minute, and listen, I promise to behave like a perfect gentleman-like one of your preux chevaliers, in fact."
"You leave no option."
"Very little."
"What do you want?" she asked. She sat down, folding her hands in her lap. She was accustomed to a life of danger.
"Come now," he said, in high good humour, quite mad, enjoying his cat-and-mouse. "We must not rush it in this bald way. We must be at ease before we begin our conversation, otherwise it will seem so strained."
"I am listening."
"No, no. You must call me Mordy, or some such pet name. Then it will seem more natural when I call you Jenny. Everything will go forward so much more pleasantly."
She would not answer.
"Guenever, have you any idea of your position?"
"My position is that of the Queen of England, as yours is that of the Protector."
"While Arthur and Lancelot are fighting each other in France."
"That is so."
"Suppose I were to tell you," he asked, stroking the pug, "that I had a letter this morning? That Arthur and Lancelot are dead?"
"I should not believe you."
"They killed each other in battle."
"It is not true," she told him quietly.
"As a matter of fact, it isn't. How did you guess?"
"If it was not true, it was cruel to say so. Why did you say it?"
"A great many people would have believed it, Jenny. I expect a great many will."
"Why should they?" she asked, before she had caught his drift. Then she stopped, catching her breath. For the first time, she began to feel afraid: but it was for Arthur.
"You can't mean ..."
"Oh, but I can," he exclaimed gaily, "and I do. What do you think would happen if I were to announce poor Arthur's death?"
"But, Mordred, you couldn't do such a thing! They are alive ... You owe everything ... The King made you his deputy ... Your fealty ... It would not be true! Arthur has always treated you with such scrupulous justice...."
He said with cold eyes: "I have never asked to be treated with justice. It is something which he does to people, to amuse himself."
"But he is your father!"
"So far as that goes, I did not ask to be born. I suppose he did that to amuse himself, also."
"I see."
She sat, twisting her sewing in her hands, trying to think.
"Why do you hate my husband?" she asked, almost with wonder.
"I don't hate him. I despise him."
"He didn't know," she explained gently, "that your mother was his sister, when it happened."
"And I suppose he didn't know that I was his son, when he put us out in the boat?"
"He was scarcely nineteen, Mordred. They had frightened him with prophecies, and he did what they made him."
"My mother was a good woman until she met King Arthur. She had a happy home with Lot of Orkney, and she bore him four brave sons. What happened after?"
"But she was more than twice his age! I should have thought ..."
He stopped her, holding up his hand.
"You are speaking of my mother."
"I am sorry, Mordred, but really ..."
"I loved my mother."
"Mordred ..."
"King Arthur came to a woman who was faithful to her husband. When he left, she was a wanton. She ended her life in a naked bed with Sir Lamorak, justly slain by her own child."
"Mordred, it is no good saying anything if you can't see ... if you can't believe that Arthur is kind and sorry and in trouble. He is fond of you. He was saying how he loved you only a day or two before this misery began...."
"He can keep his love."
"He has been so fair," she pleaded.
"The just and noble king! Yes, it is easy to be fair, when it is over. That is the amusing part. Justice! He can keep that too."
She said, trying to speak steadily: "If you proclaim yourself king, they will come from France to fight you. Then we shall have a double war instead of a single one, and it will be fought in England. The whole fellowship will be blotted out."
He smiled in pure delight.
"It seems unbelievable," she said, pinching the embroidery.
There was nothing she could do. For a moment it crossed her mind that if she humiliated herself to him, knelt down on her stiff old knees to plead for mercy, he might be soothed. But it was evidently hopeless. He was fixed in a course, like a ball in a groove. Even his conversation was, as it were, a spoken part. It would end according to the script.
"Mordred," she said helplessly, "have pity on the country people, if you will have none on Arthur or on me."
He pushed the pug off his lap and stood up, smiling at her with crazy satisfaction. He stretched himself, looking down on her, but not seeing her at all.
"I should, of course, have pity on you," he said, "if not on Arthur."
"What do you mean?"
"I was thinking of a pattern, Jenny, a simple pattern."
She watched him without speaking.
"Yes. My father committed incest with my mother. Don't you think it would be a pattern, Jenny, if I were to answer it by marrying my father's wife?"

CHAPTER XII
It was dark in Gawaine's tent, except for a flat pan of charcoal which lit it dimly from below. The tent was poor and shabby, compared with the splendid pavilions of the English knights. On the hard bed there were a few plaids in the Orkney tartan, and the only ornaments were a leaden bottle of holy water which he was taking for medicine, marked "Optimus egrorum, medicus fit Thomas bonorum," together with a withered bunch of heather, tied to the pole. These were his household gods.
Gawaine was stretched face downward on the plaids. The man was crying, slowly and hopelessly, while Arthur, sitting beside him, stroked his hand. It was his wound that had weakened him, or else he would not have cried. The old King was trying to soothe him. "Don't grieve about it, Gawaine," he said. "You did the best you could."
"It is the second time he has spared me, the second time in ae month."
"Lancelot was always strong. The years don't seem to touch him."
"Why canna he kill me, then? I begged him to have done with it. I told him that if he left me to be patched, I should but fight him fresh when I was mended.
"And, God!" he added tearfully, "my head sore aches!"
Arthur said with a sigh: "It was because you got both blows on the same place. That was bad luck."
"It makes a body feel shamed."
"Don't think about it, then. Lie quiet, or you will get feverish again, and will not be able to fight for a long time. Then what would we do? We should be quite lost without our Gawaine to lead the battle for us."
"I am but a man of straw, Arthur," he said. "I am but an ill-passioned bully, and I canna kill him."
"People who say they are no good are always the good ones. Let's change the subject and talk about something pleasant. England, for instance."
"We shall never see England again."
"Nonsense! We shall see England just in the spring. Why, it is almost spring now. The snow-drops will have been out for ages, and I dare say Guenever will have some crocuses already. She is good at gardening."
"Guenever was kind to me."
"My Gwen is kind to everybody," said the old man proudly. "I wonder what she is doing now? Going to bed, I suppose. Or perhaps she is sitting up late, having a talk with your brother. It would be nice to think that they were talking about us at this minute, perhaps saying admiring things about Gawaine's prowess: or Gwen might be saying that she wished her old man would come home."
Gawaine moved restlessly on the bed.
"I have a mind to gang home," he muttered. "If Lancelot hates clan Orkney, as Mordred says, why does he spare the laird of it? Mayhap he did kill Gareth by mischance."
"I am sure it was mischance. If you will help to end the war, we may be able to stop it fairly soon. It is your justice we are said to be fighting for now, you know. I and the others who want to fight would have to bow to that eventually. If you are content to make it up there is nobody who will be more happy than I will be."
"Aye, but I swore to fight him to the death."
"You have had two good tries."
"And taken a braw thrashing ilka time," he said bitterly. "He could have made the war end twice. Nay, it would look like cowardice to compound."
"The bravest people are the ones who don't mind looking like cowards. Remember how Lancelot hid in Joyous Gard for months, while we sang songs outside."
"I canna forget our Gareth's face."
"It was sad for all of us."
Gawaine was trying to think, an effort not made easy to him by practice. On this dark evening it was twice as difficult, because of his head. Since the time when Galahad gave him concussion in the quest for the Grail he had been liable to headaches, and now, by a curious accident, Lancelot had given him two blows in separate duels, on the same place.
"What for should I give in," he asked, "because he beats me? It would be fleeing him to give in now. If I could fell him in a third engagement, maybe. And spare the chiel ... It would be even."
"The fields," said the King thoughtfully, "will soon be king-cups and daisies in England. It would be nice to win a peace."
"Aye, and the spring hawking."
The figure twisted in its dim bed with a movement of remembrance, but froze as the pain shot through its skull.
"Almighty, but my head throbs sorely."
"Would you like me to get a wet cloth for it, or a drink of milk?"
"Nay. Let it bide. It willna help."
"Poor Gawaine. I hope nothing is broken in it."
"The thing that is broken is my spirit. Let us talk of other matters."
The King said doubtfully: "I ought not to talk too much. I think I ought to go away, and leave you to sleep."
"Ach, stay. Dinna leave me by mysel'. It irks me when I am by my lone."
"The doctor said ..."
"Tae hell wi' the doctor. Bide a wee while. Hold my hand. Tell me of England."
"There ought to be a post tomorrow, and then we shall be able to read about England. We shall have the latest news, and there will be a letter from young Mordred, and perhaps my Gwen will write to me."
"Mordred's letters are cold cheer, some way."
Arthur hastened to defend him.
"That is only because he has an unhappy life. You may depend upon it there is a regular fire of love inside him. Gwen used to say that all his warmth was for his mother."
"He was fond of our mother."
"Perhaps he was in love with her."
"That would account for why he was jealous of ye."
Gawaine was surprised at this discovery, which had struck him for the first time.
"Perhaps that was why he allowed Sir Agravaine to kill her, when she had that affair with Lamorak ... Poor boy, he has been ill-treated by the world."
"He is the only brother I have left."
"I know. Lancelot's was a tragic accident."
The laird of Lothian moved his bandage feverishly.
"But it canna have been accident. I could jalouse it had they worn their helms, but they were bonnetless. He must have known them."
"We have talked this over often."
"Aye, it is vain."
The old man asked with tragic diffidence: "You don't think you could bring yourself to forgive him, Gawaine, however it happened? I am not seeking to abandon duty, but if justice could be tempered with mercy ..."
"I will temper it when I hold him at my mercy, not before."
"Well, it is for you to say. Here comes the doctor to tell me I have stayed too long. Come in, doctor, come in."
But it was the Bishop of Rochester who entered in a bustle, carrying packets and an iron lantern.
"It is you, Rochester. We thought you were the doctor."
"Good evening, sir. And good evening to you, Sir Gawaine."
"Good evening."
"How is the head today?"
"It grows better, thank you, my lord."
"Well, that is excellent news.
"And I," he added archly, "have brought some good news too. The post has come in early!"
"Letters!"
"One for you," he handed it to the King, "a long one."
"Is there ought for me?" asked Gawaine.
"Nothing, I am afraid, this week. You will have better luck next time."
Arthur took the letters to the lantern and broke the seal.
"You will excuse me if I read."
"Of course. We cannot stand on ceremony with the news from England. Dear me, I never thought I should become a palmer at my time of life, Sir Gawaine, and have to gallivant in foreign parts...."
The bishop's prattle died away. Arthur had made no movement. He had turned neither red nor pale, nor dropped the letter, nor stared in front of him. He was reading quietly. But Rochester stopped speaking, and Gawaine raised himself on one elbow. They watched him reading, open-mouthed.
"Sir ..."
"Nothing," he said, brushing them away with his hand. "Excuse me. The news."
"I hope ..."
"Let me finish, please. Talk to Sir Gawaine."
Gawaine asked: "Is there ill tidings ... May I see?"
"No, please, a minute."
"Mordred?"
"No. It is nothing. The doctor says ... My lord, I would like to speak to you outside."
Gawaine began to heave himself into a sitting position.
"I will be told."
"There is nothing to be upset about. Lie down. We will come back."
"If ye go without telling me, I shall follow."
"It is nothing. You will hurt your head."
"What is it?"
"Nothing. It is only ..."
"Well?"
"Well, Gawaine," he said, suddenly collapsing, "it seems that Mordred has proclaimed himself the King of England, under this New Order of his."
"Mordred!"
"He has told his Thrashers that we are dead, you see," Arthur explained, as if it were some sort of problem, "and ..."
"Mordred says we are dead?"
"He says we are dead, and ..."
But he could not frame it.
"And what?"
"He is going to marry Gwen."
There was a moment of dead silence, while the bishop's hand strayed vaguely to his pectoral cross and Gawaine's clenched itself in the bed clothes. Then they both spoke at once.
"The Lord Protector ..."
"It canna be true. It will be a jest. My brother wouldna do a thing like yon."
"Unfortunately it is true," said the King patiently. "This is a letter from Guenever. Heaven knows how she managed to get it through."
"The Queen's age ..."
"After the proclamation, he proposed to her. She had nobody to help. The Queen accepted his proposal."
"Accepted Mordred!"
Gawaine had managed to swing his legs over the side of the bed.
"Uncle, give me the letter."
He took it out of the limp hand, which yielded it automatically, and began to read, tilting the page to the light.
Arthur continued to explain.
"The Queen accepted Mordred's proposal, and asked for permission to go to London for her trousseau. When she was in London with the few who remained faithful, she threw herself suddenly into the Tower and barred the gates. Thank God, it is a strong fort. They are besieging her in the Tower of London now, and Mordred is using guns."
Rochester asked in bewilderment: "Guns?"
"He is using the cannon."
It was too much for the old priest's intellects.
"It is incredible!" he said. "To say we are dead, and to marry the Queen! And then to use cannon ..."
"Now that the guns have come," said Arthur, "the Table is over. We must hurry home."
"To use cannons against men!"
"We must go to the rescue immediately, my lord. Gawaine can stay here ..."
But the Laird of Orkney was out of bed.
"Gawaine, what are you doing? Lie down at once."
"I am coming with ye."
"Gawaine, lie down. Rochester, help me with him."
"My last brother has broken his fealty."
"Gawaine ..."
"And Lancelot ... Ah God, my head!"
He stood swaying in the dim light, holding the bandage with both hands, while his shadow moved grotesquely round the tent pole.

CHAPTER XIII
Anguish of Ireland had once dreamed of a wind which blew down all their castles and towns-and this one was conspiring to do it. It was blowing round Benwick Castle on all the organ stops. The noises it made sounded like inchoate masses of silk being pulled through trees, as we pull hair through a comb-like heaps of sand pouring on fine sand from a scoop-like gigantic linens being torn-like drums in distant battle-like an endless snake switching through the world's undergrowth of trees and houses-like old men sighing, and women howling and wolves running. It whistled, hummed, throbbed, boomed in the chimneys. Above all, it sounded like a live creature: some monstrous, elemental being, wailing its damnation. It was Dante's wind, bearing lost lovers and cranes: Sabbathless Satan, toiling and turmoiling.
In the western ocean it harried the sea flat, lifting water bodily out of water and carrying it as spume. On dry land it made the trees lean down before it. The gnarled thorn trees, which had grown in double trunks, groaned one trunk against the other with plaintive screams. In the whipping and snapping branches of the trees, the birds rode it out head to wind, their bodies horizontal, their neat claws turned to anchors. The peregrines in the cliffs sat stoically, their mutton-chop-whiskers made streaky by the rain and the wet feathers standing upright on their heads. The wild geese beating out to their night's rest in the twilight scarcely won a yard a minute against the streaming air, their tumultuary cries blown backward from them, so that they had to be past before you heard them, although they were only a few feet up. The mallard and widgeon, coming in high with the gale behind, were gone before they had arrived.
Under the doors of the castle the piercing blasts tortured the flapping rushes of the floors. They boo'ed in the tubes of the corkscrew stairs, rattled the wooden shutters, whined shrilly through the shot windows, stirred the cold tapestries in frigid undulations, searched for backbones. The stone towers thrilled under them, trembling bodily like the bass strings of musical instruments. The slates flew off and shattered themselves with desultory crashes.
Bors and Bleoberis were crouching over a bright fire, to which the bitter wind seemed to have given the property of throwing out light without heat. Even the fire seemed frozen, like a painted one. Their minds were baffled by the plague of air.
"But why did they go so quickly?" asked Bors complainingly. "I never knew a siege to be raised like that before. They raised it overnight. They went as if they had been blown away."
"They must have had bad news. Something must have gone wrong in England."
"Perhaps."
"If they had decided to forgive Lancelot, they would have sent a message."
"It does seem strange, sailing away at a moment's notice, without saying anything."
"Do you think there can have been a revolt in Cornwall, or in Wales, or in Ireland?"
"There are always the Old Ones," agreed Bleoberis numbly.
"I don't think it could be a revolt. I think the King was taken ill, and had to be carried home quickly. Or Gawaine might have been taken ill. That blow which Lancelot gave him the second time, perhaps it perched his brain-pan?"
"Perhaps."
Bors banged the fire.
"To go off like that, and never say a word!"
"Why doesn't Lancelot do something?"
"What can he do?"
"I don't know."
"The King has banished him."
"Yes."
"Then there is nothing to do."
"All the same," said Bleoberis, "I wish he would do something."
A door opened with a clatter at the bottom of the turret stairs. The tapestries swirled out, the rushes stood on end, the fire gushed smoke, and Lancelot's voice embedded in the wind, shouted: "Bors! Bleoberis! Demaris!"
"Here."
"Where?"
"Up here."
As the distant door closed, silence returned to the room. The rushes lay down again, and Lancelot's feet sounded clearly on the stone steps, where before it had been difficult to hear his shout. He came in hastily, carrying a letter.
"Bors. Bleoberis. I have been looking for you."
They had stood up.
"A letter has come from England. The messengers were blown ashore, five miles up the coast. We shall have to go at once."
"To England?"
"Yes, yes. To England, of course. I have told Lionel to act as transport officer, and I want you, Bors, to look after the fodder. We shall have to wait until the gale blows itself out."
"Why are we going?" asked Bors.
"You should tell us the news ..."
"News?" he said vaguely. "There is no time for that. I will tell you in the boat. Here, read the letter."
He handed it to Bors, and was gone before they could reply.
"Well!"
"Read what it says."
"I don't even know who it is from."
"Perhaps it will say in the letter."
Lancelot re-appeared before they had taken their researches further than the date.
"Bleoberis," he said, "I forgot. I want you to look after the horses. Here, give me the writing. If you two start spelling it out, you will be reading all night."
"What does it say?"
"Most of the news came by the messenger. It seems that Mordred has revolted against Arthur, proclaimed himself the Leader of England, and proposed to Guenever."
"But she is married already," protested Bleoberis.
"That was why the siege was broken up. Then, it appears, Mordred raised an army in Kent to oppose the King's landing. He had given it out that Arthur was dead. He is besieging the Queen in the Tower of London, and using cannon."
"Cannon!"
"He met Arthur at Dover and fought a battle to prevent the landing. It was a bad engagement, half on sea and half on land, but the King won. He won to land."
"Who wrote the letter?"
Lancelot suddenly sat down.
"It is from Gawaine, from poor Gawaine! He is dead."
"Dead!"
"How can he write ..." began Bleoberis.
"It is a dreadful letter. Gawaine was a good man. All you people who forced me to fight him, you didn't see what a heart he had inside."
"Read it," suggested Bors impatiently.
"It seems that a cut which I gave him on the head was a dangerous one. He never ought to have travelled. But he was lonely and miserable and he had been betrayed. His last brother had turned traitor. He insisted on going back to help the King-and, in the landing battle, he tried to strike his blow. Unfortunately he was clubbed on the old wound, and died of it a few hours later."
"I don't see why you should be disturbed."
"Listen to the letter."
Lancelot carried it to the window and fell silent, examining the writing. There was something touching about it, the hand being so unlike its author. Gawaine had hardly been the sort of person you thought of as a writer. Indeed it would have seemed more natural if he had been illiterate, like most of the others. Yet here, instead of the spiky Gothic then in use, was the lovely old Gaelic minuscule, as neat and round and small as when he had learned it from some ancient saint in dim Dunlothian. He had written so unfrequently since, that the art had retained its beauty. It was an old-maid's hand, or an old-fashioned boy's, sitting with his feet hooked round the legs of a stool and his tongue out, writing carefully. He had carried this innocent precision, these dainty demoded cusps, through misery and passion to old age. It was as if a bright boy had stepped out of the black armour: a small boy with a drop on the end of his nose, his feet bare with blue toes, a root of tangle in the thin bundle of carrots which were his fingers.
"Unto Sir Lancelot, flower of all noble knights that ever I heard of or saw by my days: I, Sir Gawaine, King Lot's son of Orkney, sister's son unto the noble King Arthur, send thee greetings.
"And I will that all the world wit that I, Sir Gawaine, Knight of the Round Table, sought my death at thy hands-and not through thy deserving, but it was mine own seeking. Wherefore I beseech thee, Sir Lancelot, to return again unto this realm and see my tomb, and pray some prayer more or less for my soul.
"And this same day that I wrote this cedle, I was hurt to the death in the same wound which I had on thy hand, Sir Lancelot-for of a more nobler man might I not be slain.
"Also, Sir Lancelot, for all the love that ever was betwixt us..."
Lancelot stopped reading and threw the letter on the table.
"Here," he said, "I can't go on. He urges me to come with speed, to help the King against his brother: his last relation. Gawaine loved his family, Bors, and in the end he was left with none. Yet he wrote to forgive me. He even said that it was his own fault. God knows, he was a right good brother."
"What are we to do about the King?"
"We must get to England as quickly as we can. Mordred has retreated to Canterbury, where he offers a fresh battle. It may be over by now. This news has been delayed by storm. Everything depends on speed."
Bleoberis said: "I will go and look to the horses. When do we sail?"
"Tomorrow. Tonight. Now. When the wind drops. Be quick with them."
"Good."
"And you, Bors, the fodder."
"Yes."
Lancelot followed Bleoberis to the stairs, but turned in the doorway.
"The Queen besieged," he said. "We must get her out."
"Yes."
Bors, left alone with the wind, picked up the letter with curiosity. He tilted it in the failing light, admiring the zed-like g, the curly b, and the curved t, like the blade of a plough. Each tiny line was the furrow it threw up, sweet as the new earth. But the furrow wandered towards the end. He turned it about, observing the brown signature. He spelled out the conclusion-making speaking movements with his mouth, while the rushes tapped and the smoke puffed and the wind howled.
"And at this date my letter was written, but two hours and a half afore my death, written with mine own hand, and so subscribed with part of my heart's blood.
Gawaine of Orkney."
He spelled the name out twice, and tapped his teeth. Gawaine. "I suppose," he said out loud, doubtfully, "they would have pronounced it Cuchullain in the North? You can't tell with ancient languages."
Then he put down the letter, went over to the dreary window, and began humming a tune called Brume, brume on hil, whose words have been lost to us in the wave of time. Perhaps they were like the modern ones, which say that
Still the blood is strong, the heart is Highland,
And we in dreams behold the Hebrides.

CHAPTER XIV
The same wind of sorrow whistled round the King's pavilion at Salisbury. Inside there was a silent calm, after the riot of the open. It was a sumptuous interior, what with the royal tapestries-Uriah was there, still in the article of bisection-and the couch strewn deep with furs, and the flashing candles. It was a marquee rather than a tent. The King's mail gleamed dully on a rack at the back. An ill-bred falcon, who was subject to the vice of screaming, stood hooded and motionless on a perch like a parrot's, brooding in some ancestral nightmare. A greyhound, as white as ivory, couching on its hocks and elbows, its tail curved into the bony sickle of the greyhound, watched the old man with the doe-soft eyes of pity. A superb enamelled chess-board, with pieces of jasper and crystal, stood at checkmate beside the bed. There were papers everywhere. They covered the secretary's table, the reading desk, the stools-dreary papers of government, still bravely persevered in-of law, still to be codified-of commissariat and of armament and of orders for the day. A large ledger lay open at the note of some wretched defaulter, William atte Lane, who had been condemned to be hanged, suspendatur, for looting. On the margin, in the secretary's neat hand, was the laconic epitaph "susp.", suitable to the mood of tragedy. Covering the reading desk there were endless piles of petitions and memorials, all annotated with the royal decision and signature. On those to which the King had agreed, he had written laboriously "Le roy le veult." The rejected petitions were marked with the courtly evasion always used by royalty: "Le roy s'advisera." The reading desk and its seat were made in one piece, and there the King himself sat drooping. His head lay among the papers, scattering them. He looked as if he were dead-he nearly was.
Arthur was tired out. He had been broken by the two battles which he had fought already, the one at Dover, the other at Barham Down. His wife was a prisoner. His oldest friend was banished. His son was trying to kill him. Gawaine was buried. His Table was dispersed. His country was at war. Yet he could have breasted all these things in some way, if the central tenet of his heart had not been ravaged. Long ago, when his mind had been a nimble boy's called Wart-long ago he had been taught by an aged benevolence, wagging a white beard. He had been taught by Merlyn to believe that man was perfectible: that he was on the whole more decent than beastly: that good was worth trying: that there was no such thing as original sin. He had been forged as a weapon for the aid of man, on the assumption that men were good. He had been forged, by that deluded old teacher, into a sort of Pasteur or Curie or patient discover of insulin. The service for which he had been destined had been against Force, the mental illness of humanity. His Table, his idea of Chivalry, his Holy Grail, his devotion to Justice: these had been progressive steps in the effort for which he had been bred. He was like a scientist who had pursued the root of cancer all his life. Might-to have ended it-to have made men happier. But the whole structure depended on the first premise: that man was decent.
Looking back at his life, it seemed to him that he had been struggling all the time to dam a flood, which, whenever he had checked it, had broken through at a new place, setting him his work to do again. It was the flood of Force Majeur. During the earliest days before his marriage he had tried to match its strength with strength-in his battles against the Gaelic confederation-only to find that two wrongs did not make a right. But he had crushed the feudal dream of war successfully. Then, with his Round Table, he had tried to harness Tyranny in lesser forms, so that its power might be used for useful ends. He had sent out the men of might to rescue the oppressed and to straighten evil-to put down the individual might of barons, just as he had put down the might of kings. They had done so-until, in the course of time, the ends had been achieved, but the force had remained upon his hands unchastened. So he had sought for a new channel, had sent them out on God's business, searching for the Holy Grail. That too had been a failure, because those who had achieved the Quest had become perfect and been lost to the world, while those who had failed in it had soon returned no better. At last he had sought to make a map of force, as it were, to bind it down by laws. He had tried to codify the evil uses of might by individuals, so that he might set bounds to them by the impersonal justice of the state. He had been prepared to sacrifice his wife and his best friend, to the impersonality of Justice. And then, even as the might of the individual seemed to have been curbed, the Principle of Might had sprung up behind him in another shape-in the shape of collective might, of banded ferocity, of numerous armies insusceptible to individual laws. He had bound the might of units, only to find that it was assumed by pluralities. He had conquered murder, to be faced with war. There were no Laws for that.
The wars of his early days, those against Lot and the Dictator of Rome, had been battles to upset the feudal convention of warfare as foxhunting or as gambling for ransom. To upset it, he had introduced the idea of total war. In his old age this same total warfare had come back to roost as total hatred, as the most modern of hostilities.
Now, with his forehead resting on the papers and his eyes closed, the King was trying not to realize. For if there was such a thing as original sin, if man was on the whole a villain, if the bible was right in saying that the heart of men was deceitful above all things and desperately wicked, then the purpose of his life had been a vain one. Chivalry and justice became a child's illusions, if the stock on which he had tried to graft them was to be the Thrasher, was to be Homo ferox instead of Homo sapiens.
Behind this thought there was a worse one, with which he dared not grapple. Perhaps man was neither good nor bad, was only a machine in an insensate universe-his courage no more than a reflex to danger, like the automatic jump at the pin-prick. Perhaps there were no virtues, unless jumping at pin-pricks was a virtue, and humanity only a mechanical donkey led on by the iron carrot of love, through the pointless treadmill of reproduction. Perhaps Might was a law of Nature, needed to keep the survivors fit. Perhaps he himself...
But he could challenge it no further. He felt as if there was something atrophied between his eyes, where the base of the nose grew into the skull. He could not sleep. He had bad dreams. Tomorrow was the final battle. Meanwhile there were all these papers to read and sign. But he could neither read nor sign them. He could not lift his head from the desk.
Why did men fight?
The old man had always been a dutiful thinker, never an inspired one. Now his exhausted brain slipped into its accustomed circles: the withered paths, like those of the donkey in the treadmill, round which he had plodded many thousand times in vain.
Was it the wicked leaders who led innocent populations to slaughter, or was it wicked populations who chose leaders after their own hearts? On the face of it, it seemed unlikely that one Leader could force a million Englishmen against their will. If, for instance, Mordred had been anxious to make the English wear petticoats, or stand on their heads, they would surely not have joined his party-however clever or persuasive or deceitful or even terrible his inducements? A leader was surely forced to offer something which appealed to those he led? He might give the impetus to the falling building, but surely it had to be toppling on its own account before it fell? If this were true, then wars were not calamities into which amiable innocents were led by evil men. They were national movements, deeper, more subtle in origin. And, indeed, it did not feel to him as if he or Mordred had led their country to its misery. If it was so easy to lead one's country in various directions, as if she was a pig on a string, why had he failed to lead her into chivalry, into justice and into peace? He had been trying.
Then again-this was the second circle-it was like the Inferno-if neither he nor Mordred had really set the misery in motion, who had been the cause? How did the fact of war begin in general? For any one war seemed so rooted in its antecedents. Mordred went back to Morgause, Morgause to Uther Pendragon, Uther to his ancestors. It seemed as if Cain had slain Abel, seizing his country, after which the men of Abel had sought to win their patrimony again for ever. Man had gone on, through age after age, avenging wrong with wrong, slaughter with slaughter. Nobody was the better for it, since both sides always suffered, yet everybody was inextricable. The present war might be attributed to Mordred, or to himself. But also it was due to a million Thrashers, to Lancelot, Guenever, Gawaine, everybody. Those who lived by the sword were forced to die by it. It was as if everything would lead to sorrow, so long as man refused to forget the past. The wrongs of Uther and of Cain were wrongs which could have been righted only by the blessing of forgetting them.
Sisters, mothers, grandmothers: everything was rooted in the past! Actions of any sort in one generation might have incalculable consequences in another, so that merely to sneeze was a pebble thrown into a pond, whose circles might lap the furthest shores. It seemed as if the only hope was not to act at all, to draw no swords for anything, to hold oneself still, like a pebble not thrown. But that would be hateful.
What was Right, what was Wrong? What distinguished Doing from Not Doing? If I were to have my time again, the old King thought, I would bury myself in a monastery, for fear of a Doing which might lead to woe.
The blessing of forgetfulness: that was the first essential. If everything one did, or which one's fathers had done, was an endless sequence of Doings doomed to break forth bloodily, then the past must be obliterated and a new start made. Man must be ready to say: Yes, since Cain there has been injustice, but we can only set the misery right if we accept a status quo. Lands have been robbed, men slain, nations humiliated. Let us now start fresh without remembrance, rather than live forward and backward at the same time. We cannot build the future by avenging the past. Let us sit down as brothers, and accept the Peace of God.
Unfortunately men did say this, in each successive war. They were always saying that the present one was to be the last, and afterwards there was to be a heaven. They were always to rebuild such a new world as never was seen. When the time came, however, they were too stupid. They were like children crying out that they would build a house-but, when it came to building, they had not the practical ability. They did not know the way to choose the right materials.
The old man's thoughts went laboriously. They were leading him nowhere: they doubled back on themselves and ran the same course twice: yet he was so accustomed to them that he could not stop. He entered another circle.
Perhaps the great cause of war was possession, as John Ball the communist had said. "The matters gothe nat well to passe in Englonde," he had stated, "nor shall nat do tyll every thyng be common, and that there be no villayns nor gentylmen." Perhaps wars were fought because people said my kingdom, my wife, my lover, my possessions. This was what he and Lancelot and all of them had always held behind their thoughts. Perhaps, so long as people tried to possess things separately from each other, even honour and souls, there would be wars for ever. The hungry wolf would always attack the fat reindeer, the poor man would rob the banker, the serf would make revolutions against the higher class, and the lack-penny nation would fight the rich. Perhaps wars only happened between those who had and those who had not. As against this, you were forced to place the fact that nobody could define the state of 'having.' A knight with a silver suit of armour would immediately call himself a have-not, if he met a knight with a golden one.
But, he thought, assume for a moment that 'having,' however it is defined, might be the crux of the problem.
I have, and Mordred has not. He protested to himself in contradiction: it is not fair to put it like that, as if Mordred or I were the movers of the storm. For indeed, we are nothing but figureheads to complex forces which seem to be under a kind of impulse. It is as if there was an impulse in the fabric of society. Mordred is urged along almost helplessly now, by numbers of people too many to count: people who believe in John Ball, hoping to gain power over their fellow men by asserting that all are equal, or people who see in any upheaval a chance to advance their own might. It seems to come from underneath. Ball's men and Mordred's are the under-dogs seeking to rise, or the knights who were not leaders of the Round Table and therefore hated it, or the poor who would be rich, or the powerless seeking to gain power. And my men, for whom I am no more than a standard or a talisman, are the knights who were leaders-the rich defending their possessions, the powerful unready to let it slip. It is a meeting of the Haves and Have-Nots in force, an insane clash between bodies of men, not between leaders. But let that pass. Assume the vague idea that war is due to "having" in general. In that case the proper thing would be to refuse to have at all. Such, as Rochester had sometimes pointed out, was the advice of God. There had been the rich man who was threatened with the needle's eye, and there had been the money changers. That was why the Church could not interfere too much in the sad affairs of the world, so Rochester said, because the nations and the classes and the individuals were always crying out "Mine, mine," where the Church was instructed to say "Ours."
If this were true, then it would not be a question only of sharing property, as such. It would be a question of sharing everything-even thoughts, feelings, lives. God had told people that they would have to cease to live as individuals. They would have to go into the force of life, like a drop falling into a river. God had said that it was only the men who could give up their jealous selves, their futile individualities of happiness and sorrow, who would die peacefully and enter the ring. He that would save his life was asked to lose it.
Yet there was something in the old white head which could not accept the godly view. Obviously you might cure a cancer of the womb by not having a womb in the first place. Sweeping and drastic remedies could cut out anything-and life with the cut. Ideal advice, which nobody was built to follow, was no advice at all. Advising heaven to earth was useless.
Another worn-out circle spun before him. Perhaps war was due to fear: to fear of reliability. Unless there was truth, and unless people told the truth, there was always danger in everything outside the individual. You told the truth to yourself, but you had no surety for your neighbour. This uncertainty must end by making the neighbour a menace. Such, at any rate, would have been Lancelot's explanation of the war. He had been used to say that man's most vital possession was his Word. Poor Lance, he had broken his own word: all the same, there had been few men with such a good one.
Perhaps wars happened because nations had no confidence in the Word. They were frightened, and so they fought. Nations were like people-they had feelings of inferiority, or of superiority, or of revenge, or of fear. It was right to personify nations.
Suspicion and fear: possessiveness and greed: resentment for ancestral wrong: all these seemed to be a part of it. Yet they were not the solution. He could not see the real solution. He was too old and tired and miserable to think constructively. He was only a man who had meant well, who had been spurred along that course of thinking by an eccentric necromancer with a weakness for humanity. Justice had been his last attempt-to do nothing which was not just. But it had ended in failure. To do at all had proved too difficult. He was done himself.
Arthur proved that he was not quite done, by lifting his head. There was something invincible in his heart, a tincture of grandness in simplicity. He sat upright and reached for the iron bell.
"Page," he said, as the small boy trotted in, knuckling his eyes.
"My lord."
The King looked at him. Even in his own extremity he was able to notice others, especially if they were fresh or decent. When he had comforted the broken Gawaine in his tent, he had been the one who was more in need of comfort.
"My poor child," he said. "You ought to be in bed."
He observed the boy with a strained, thread-bare attention. It was long since he had seen youth's innocence and certainty.
"Look," he said, "will you take this note to the bishop? Don't wake him if he is asleep."
"My lord."
"Thank you."
As the live creature went, he called it back.
"Oh, page?"
"My lord?"
"What is your name?"
"Tom, my lord," it said politely.
"Where do you live?"
"Near Warwick, my lord."
"Near Warwick."
The old man seemed to be trying to imagine the place, as if it were Paradise Terrestre, or a country described by Mandeville.
"At a place called Newbold Revell. It is a pretty one."
"How old are you?"
"I shall be thirteen in November, my lord."
"And I have kept you up all night."
"No, my lord. I slept a lot on one of the saddles."
"Tom of Newbold Revell," he said with wonder. "We seem to have involved a lot of people. Tell me, Tom, what do you intend to do tomorrow?"
"I shall fight, sir. I have a good bow."
"And you will kill people with this bow?"
"Yes, my lord. A great many, I hope."
"Suppose they were to kill you?"
"Then I should be dead, my lord."
"I see."
"Shall I take the letter now?"
"No. Wait a minute. I want to talk to somebody, only my head is muddled."
"Shall I fetch a glass of wine?"
"No, Tom. Sit down and try to listen. Lift those chessmen off the stool. Can you understand things when they are said?"
"Yes, my lord. I am good at understanding."
"Could you understand if I asked you not to fight tomorrow?"
"I should want to fight," it said stoutly.
"Everybody wants to fight, Tom, but nobody knows why. Suppose I were to ask you not to fight, as a special favour to the King? Would you do that?"
"I should do what I was told."
"Listen, then. Sit for a minute and I will tell you a story. I am a very old man, Tom, and you are young. When you are old, you will be able to tell what I have told tonight, and I want you to do that. Do you understand this want?"
"Yes, sir. I think so."
"Put it like this. There was a king once, called King Arthur. That is me. When he came to the throne of England, he found that all the kings and barons were fighting against each other like madmen, and, as they could afford to fight in expensive suits of armour, there was practically nothing which could stop them from doing what they pleased. They did a lot of bad things, because they lived by force. Now this king had an idea, and the idea was that force ought to be used, if it were used at all, on behalf of justice, not on its own account. Follow this, young boy. He thought that if he could get his barons fighting for truth, and to help weak people, and to redress wrongs, then their fighting might not be such a bad thing as once it used to be. So he gathered together all the true and kindly people that he knew, and he dressed them in armour, and he made them knights, and taught them his idea, and set them down, at a Round Table. There were a hundred and fifty of them in the happy days, and King Arthur loved his Table with all his heart. He was prouder of it than he was of his own dear wife, and for many years his new knights went about killing ogres, and rescuing damsels and saving poor prisoners, and trying to set the world to rights. That was the King's idea."
"I think it was a good idea, my lord."
"It was, and it was not. God knows."
"What happened to the King in the end?" asked the child, when the story seemed to have dried up.
"For some reason, things went wrong. The Table split into factions, a bitter war began, and all were killed."
The boy interrupted confidently.
"No," he said, "not all. The King won. We shall win."
Arthur smiled vaguely and shook his head. He would have nothing but the truth.
"Everybody was killed," he repeated, "except a certain page. I know what I am talking about."
"My lord?"
"This page was called young Tom of Newbold Revell near Warwick, and the old King sent him off before the battle, upon pain of dire disgrace. You see, the King wanted there to be somebody left, who would remember their famous idea. He wanted badly that Tom should go back to Newbold Revell, where he could grow into a man and live his life in Warwickshire peace-and he wanted him to tell everybody who would listen about this ancient idea, which both of them had once thought good. Do you think you could do that, Thomas, to please the King?"
The child said, with the pure eyes of absolute truth: "I would do anything for King Arthur."
"That's a brave fellow. Now listen, man. Don't get these legendary people muddled up. It is I who tell you about my idea. It is I who am going to command you to take horse to Warwickshire at once, and not to fight with your bow tomorrow at all. Do you understand all this?"
"Yes, King Arthur."
"Will you promise to be careful of yourself afterward? Will you try to remember that you are a kind of vessel to carry on the idea, when things go wrong, and that the whole hope depends on you alive?"
"I will."
"It seems selfish of me to use you for it."
"It is an honour for your poor page, good my lord."
"Thomas, my idea of those knights was a sort of candle, like these ones here. I have carried it for many years with a hand to shield it from the wind. It has flickered often. I am giving you the candle now-you won't let it out?"
"It will burn."
"Good Tom. The light-bringer. How old did you say you were?"
"Nearly thirteen."
"Sixty more years then, perhaps. Half a century."
"I will give it to other people, King. English people."
"You will say to them in Warwickshire: Eh, he wor a wonderly fine candle?"
"Aye, lad, that I will."
"Then 'tis: Na, Tom, for thee must go right quickly. Thou'lt take the best son of a mare that thee kinst find, and thou wilt ride post into Warwickshire, lad, wi' nowt but the curlew?"
"I will ride post, mate, so that the candle burn."
"Good Tom, then, God bless 'ee. Doant thee ferget thick Bishop of Rochester, afore thou goest."
The little boy kneeled down to kiss his master's hand-his surcoat, with the Malory bearings, looking absurdly new.
"My lord of England," he said.
Arthur raised him gently, to kiss him on the shoulder.
"Sir Thomas of Warwick," he said-and the boy was gone.
The tent was empty, tawny and magnificent. The wind wailed and the candles guttered. Waiting for the bishop, the old, old man sat down at his reading desk. Presently his head drooped forward on the papers. The greyhound's eyes, catching the candles as she watched him, burned spectrally, two amber cups of feral light. Mordred's cannonade, which he was to keep up through the darkness until the morning's battle, began to thud and bump outside. The King, drained of his last effort, gave way to sorrow. Even when his visitor's hand lifted the tent flap, the silent drops coursed down his nose and fell on the parchment with regular ticks, like an ancient clock. He turned his head aside, unwilling to be seen, unable to do better. The flap fell, as the strange figure in cloak and hat came softly in.
"Merlyn?"
But there was nobody there: he had dreamed him in a cat-nap of old age.
Merlyn?
He began to think again, but now it was as clearly as it had ever been. He remembered the aged necromancer who had educated him-who had educated him with animals. There were, he remembered, something like half a million different species of animal, of which mankind was only one. Of course man was an animal-he was not a vegetable or a mineral, was he? And Merlyn had taught him about animals so that the single species might learn by looking at the problems of the thousands. He remembered the belligerent ants, who claimed their boundaries, and the pacific geese, who did not. He remembered his lesson from the badger. He remembered Lyo-lyok and the island which they had seen on their migration, where all those puffins, razorbills, guillemots and kittiwakes had lived together peacefully, preserving their own kinds of civilization without war-because they claimed no boundaries. He saw the problem before him as plain as a map. The fantastic thing about war was that it was fought about nothing-literally nothing. Frontiers were imaginary lines. There was no visible line between Scotland and England, although Flodden and Bannockburn had been fought about it. It was geography which was the cause-political geography. It was nothing else. Nations did not need to have the same kind of civilization, nor the same kind of leader, any more than the puffins and the guillemots did. They could keep their own civilizations, like Esquimaux and Hottentots, if they would give each other freedom of trade and free passage and access to the world. Countries would have to become counties-but counties which could keep their own culture and local laws. The imaginary lines on the earth's surface only needed to be unimagined. The airborne birds skipped them by nature. How mad the frontiers had seemed to Lyo-lyok, and would to Man if he could learn to fly.
The old King felt refreshed, clear-headed, almost ready to begin again.
There would be a day-there must be a day-when he would come back to Gramarye with a new Round Table which had no corners, just as the world had none-a table without boundaries between the nations who would sit to feast there. The hope of making it would lie in culture. If people could be persuaded to read and write, not just to eat and make love, there was still a chance that they might come to reason.
But it was too late for another effort then. For that time it was his destiny to die, or, as some say, to be carried off to Avilion, where he could wait for better days. For that time it was Lancelot's fate and Guenever's to take the tonsure and the veil, while Mordred must be slain. The fate of this man or that man was less than a drop, although it was a sparkling one, in the great blue motion of the sunlit sea.
The cannons of his adversary were thundering in the tattered morning when the Majesty of England drew himself up to meet the future with a peaceful heart.
EXPLICIT LIBER REGIS QUONDAM REGISQUE FUTURI
THE BEGINNING
